SwissBanking

Dormant assets

A factsheet of the Swiss Bankers Association
Introduction

Circumstances may arise in which contact betweena bank and a client is lost,and as a
result the assets held by the bank become “dormant”.

Such assets may then ultimately be forgotten about by the client and their heirs.

The amended SwissBanking Act and the revised Banking Ordinance entered into force
on 1 January 2015, as did the new guidelines of the Swiss Bankers Association (SBA) on
the treatment of assets without contact and dormant assets held at Swiss banks. The
corresponding rules and regulations state that:

o allassets in cases where the bank is unable to establish any contact withthe
client will be deemed tobe “without contact” for ten years;

o after this period, these assets will be deemed “dormant” for afurther 50 years,
and subsequently — 60 years after the last contact withthe client —will be
published on https.//www.dormantaccounts.ch. Thispublicationrequirement
appliestoall assetswhere their total value exceeds CHF 500 or is unknown;

e ifno contact isreceived from an entitled claimant within one year of this
publication, the bank will transfer the assets to the federal government. For assets
where the last contact with the client happened in 1954 or earlier, the assets
remain published for 5 years;

e assets up toa maximum value of CHF 500 will be transferred after 60 years
without such publication being made.

The transfer of the assets rendersall claims null and void.

To prevent contact from being lost or assets becoming dormant, the SBA has drawn up
recommendations in conjunction withthe banks. These are set out inthis leaflet. The SBA
would also like todraw your attention tothe measures that banks are totake in cases
where contact is lost or assets become dormant.

Should you require any further information, your bank will be happy to help you.
Searching for assets without contact / dormant assets

Ifyou are aware of assets without contact /dormant assets to which you are entitled,
please contact the bank concerned directly. If you do not know the name of the bank,
you can carry out a search via the Swiss Banking Ombudsman
www.bankingombudsman.ch). Please note that to make such a search, you will have to
provide documents to prove your entitlement.

2 December 2015 | S8A | Domant assets
Recommendations for preventing loss of contact
Change of name and address

Please inform your bank immediately if you change your place of residence, address or
name, and your bank therefore needs to update these detailsaccordingly.

Special instructions

Please inform your bank ifyou are going away for an extended period of time and
arrange e.g. for correspondence from your bank to be sent to another address or kept at
the bank. You should also tell them how you can still be contacted in urgent cases.

Designating an authorised agent

Itisgenerally advisable todesignate an authorised agent who can be contacted by your
bank in the event of contact being lost.

Informing trusted persons / your will

Another way of preventing contact from being lost and assets from becoming dormant
is toinform a person you trust about your bank details. However, the bank can only give
information to such a person ifyou have first authorised him or her in writing toact on
your behalf (wherever possible using a form supplied by the bank). You could also list
your assets and the name of the bank(s) where they are deposited, e.g.inyour will.

Individual advice

Your bank will be happy to help you and give you advice in line with your specific
circumstances.

Dormant assets | SBA | December 2015
Measures banks are to take in cases of contact being lost

In the guidelines on the treatment of assets without contact and dormant assets held at
Swiss banks, the SBA Board of Directors has set out the procedures banks are to follow in
the event of contact being lost:

Immediate measures

Ifa bank findsthat its correspondence toa clientisno longer deliverable,e.g.due toa
change of address,and there is no longer any documented contact withthisclient (e.g.
visit to the bank, loginto e-banking), the bank should with appropriate diligence attempt
to re-establish contact, and toascertain the new addressfor example.

Further measures in the case of lost contact

Further measures are to be taken in accordance with the principle of proportionality, and
based on the amount of the assets in question. The bank may also appoint agents to
investigate. Such agents are subject tothe same confidentiality requirementsas the
bank's employees, thereby preserving bank-client confidentiality.

Ifthe bank's inquiriesfollowing aloss of contact are unsuccessful, or if establishing
contact withthe clientisnot possible for other reasons, the assets are deemed tobe
“without contact”. Inthis case, under the guidelinesthe banks are obliged to:

e record the assets of these clientscentrally within the bank and to hold them as
assets without contact for ten years,

e earmark the assets and report all safe-deposit boxes and all assets with a value of
more than CHF 500 toa central database that can only be searched by the Swiss
Banking Ombudsman in the interest of the entitled party. The persons working at
this office, which isequipped with state-of-the-art security measures, are subject
to bank-client confidentiality,

e publishthe information on the bank client on https//www.dormantaccountsch
50years after the assets having become dormant (i.e. 60 years after the last
contact), provided the total amount of that client’s assets exceeds CHF 500,

e transfer the assets to the Federal Department of Finance, if no valid claim tothe
assets has beenraised during the publication period. The transfer of the assets
rendersall claims null and void.

4 December 2015 | S8A | Domant assets
Measures banks are to take in cases of contact being lost

Loss of contact
Last contact with client,
immediate measures

 

& Absence of contact
from loss of contact:
other search measures

without success

~l
g Search s

&g =500 CHF
Closure and
transfer

 

Closure and Entitled
transfer claimant

* 5 years in case of last contact 1954 or earlier

 

Dormant assets | SBA | December 2015
Continued rights in cases of lost contact

Therightsof the clients and their heirsremainintact even inthe case of contact being
lost and assets becoming dormant, until such time as the assets are delivered tothe
federal government. Banks may only take action that divergesfrom the contractual
agreement withthe client if such action is inthe client’s best interest:

e Savings accounts must be continued unchanged and interest accrued at the
bank's current rates.

e Currentaccounts and similar balances must be invested to protect the client's
interests, i.e.diligentlyand, as far as possible, profitably (e.g.insavings accounts,
medium-term notesor a fund witha conservative risk profile).

e Securitiesaccounts should be continued as usual; money from maturing
securitiesand accumulated interest or dividends should be invested insimilar or
other suitable securities. The bank may also invest in other assets toavoid loss in
value.

e Inaccordance withthe bank's internal directives, safe-deposit boxes may be
opened in cases where the rentisno longer covered, to complete the search
measures, where applicable toensure the preservation of the value of the
contents, and witha view to liquidation. Inthis case, the contents are to be
stored centrally.

Your bank will be happy to give you any further detailed informationyou need on the
treatment of dormant assets.

Costs

The bank's usual costs and fees continue toapply incases where contact is lost or assets
become dormant. If these costs and fees exceed the assets in question, the client
relationship may be closed.

Banks may also charge tothe account inquestion costs they incur inmaking inquiries,
costs for the special treatment and monitoring of assets without contact and dormant
assets, as well as costs for the publication of the correspdoning account. Costs for
handling manifestly unfounded claims may be charched tothe applicant.

Basel, December 2015 Swiss Bankers Association

http://www.swissbanking.org/en/dormant-assets.htm

6 December 2015 | S8A | Domant assets
* Swiss Bankers Association
Aeschenplatz 7
PO Box 4182
CH-4002 Basel
T+41612959393
F+416127253 82
office@sba.ch
www.swissbanking.org
